.. _event_models:

Configuring Event Models
========================

Event model fields such as the ones automatically added by ``django-pghistory`` can
be configured in a number of ways. Here we discuss how to set global defaults
for event models and how to override them on a per-model basis. We also discuss
how one can denormalize context fields.

Configuration Hierarchy
-----------------------

When configuring event models, keep in mind that all configuration follows a
hierarchy. Defaults are first loaded from settings followed by per-model
overrides.

Field behavior also follows a hierarchy. If,
for example, the default foreign key configuration is changed, this will affect every foreign key
unless overridden. We'll get into more examples throughout this section. First we start
with the base field configuration that applies to every field on an event model.

Default Fields
--------------

Every field on an event model, including the ones derived from the tracked
model, have attributes overridden by the default `pghistory.Field` instance,
which is configured by ``settings.PGHISTORY_FIELD``.

The `pghistory.Field` object has the following attributes that can be
configured, some of which already have overrides::

    primary_key=False
    unique=False
    blank=pghistory.DEFAULT
    null=pghistory.DEFAULT
    db_index=False
    editable=pghistory.DEFAULT
    unique_for_date=None
    unique_for_month=None
    unique_for_year=None

Any attribute with ``pghistory.DEFAULT`` means it will use the attribute from the tracked
field. All others are overrides.

In other words, tracked models will have all primary keys stripped and unique constraints
removed by default. Indices are also removed from all tracked fields unless overridden.

If, for example, you'd like event models to not override the ``db_index`` attribute of
tracked fields,
you can do ``settings.PGHISTORY_FIELD = pghistory.Field(db_index=pghistory.DEFAULT)``.
All default overrides, such as ``unique_for_date=None`` will still be applied.

.. note::

    The ``Meta`` of the tracked model is never used by the event model, so custom
    indices here will have to be manually provided by either the ``meta`` option
    to `pghistory.track` or by :ref:`making a custom event model <custom_event_models>`.

Related Fields
--------------

One can override the behavior of related fields by using
the `pghistory.RelatedField` class and setting it with
``settings.PGHISTORY_RELATED_FIELD``.

This configuration class uses all of the attributes of `pghistory.Field`
and provides these additional attributes::

    related_name="+"
    related_query_name="+"

In other words, related names are reset to prevent clashes.
Let's say you'd like related names to not be overridden, along with ensuring
every related field has ``null=True``. You would do this:

.. code-block:: python

    PGHISTORY_RELATED_FIELD = pghistory.RelatedField(
        related_name=pghistory.DEFAULT,
        related_query_name=pghistory.DEFAULT,
        null=True
    )


.. important::

    Remember, the related field configuration will inherit any custom overrides of the
    default field configuration.

Foreign Keys
------------

Going a step beyond related fields, one can specifically target foreign keys
(and one-to-one fields) with the `pghistory.ForeignKey` configuration object
and ``settings.PGHISTORY_FOREIGN_KEY_FIELD`` setting.

This configuration class uses all of the attributes of `pghistory.RelatedField`
field and provides these attributes::

    on_delete=models.DO_NOTHING
    db_constraint=False

In other words, all foreign keys are unconstrained by default. Event models
will *not* be cascade deleted by default. Along with this, `pghistory.ForeignKey`
overrides  ``db_index=True`` to ensure
all foreign keys are indexed by default.

If, for example, one wants event models to always be cascade deleted and have
referential integrity, do:

.. code-block::

    PGHISTORY_FOREIGN_KEY_FIELD = pghistory.ForeignKey(
        on_delete=models.CASCADE,
        db_constraint=True
    )

.. important::

    Just like `pghistory.RelatedField`, `pghistory.ForeignKey` inherits
    overrides from the base field and related field configuration.

``pgh_obj`` Field
-----------------

The default ``pgh_obj`` field of event models can be set with
``settings.PGH_OBJ_FIELD`` or by supplying the ``obj_field`` argument
to `pghistory.track` or `pghistory.create_event_model`.
It must be set to a `pghistory.ObjForeignKey`
instance, which overrides the following attributes::

    related_name=pghistory.DEFAULT
    related_query_name=pghistory.DEFAULT

In other words, ``pgh_obj`` will have the default related name applied.
Since ``pgh_obj`` is generated by ``django-pghistory``, the
default related name is "events". In version 3, this behavior
will be changed to remove the related name.

Use ``None`` to ignore creating the ``pgh_obj`` field on the event model.

``pgh_context`` Field
---------------------

The default ``pgh_context`` field of event models can be set with
``settings.PGH_CONTEXT_FIELD`` or by supplying the
``context_field`` argument to `pghistory.track` or
`pghistory.create_event_model`. It must be set to either a
`pghistory.ContextForeignKey` or `pghistory.ContextJSONField` instance.
When using the former, event models will reference a shared
``pghistory.Context`` model. When using the latter,
context will be denormalized. We discuss this in detail in :ref:`denormalizing_context`.

By default, the context foreign key object uses ``null=True`` to ensure
that context is optional.

Similar to ``pgh_obj``, the ``pgh_context`` argument and setting can be ``None`` if one
wishes to ignore context tracking.m

``pgh_context_id`` Field
------------------------

When denormalizing context, one can configure the default ID field used
with ``settings.PGH_CONTEXT_ID_FIELD`` or by supplying the
``context_id_field`` to `pghistory.track` or `pghistory.create_event_model`.
It must be set to a `pghistory.ContextUUIDField` instance.
We discuss this in detail in the :ref:`denormalizing_context` subsection.

Set this to ``None`` to ignore storing the ID when denormalizing context.

Configuration with ``pghistory.track``
--------------------------------------

`pghistory.track` takes ``obj_field``, ``context_field``, and ``context_id_field``
arguments for overriding event fields on a per-model basis. These must be supplied
configuration instances just like global settings. For example, ``obj_field``
takes `pghistory.ObjForeignKey` instances.

Keep in mind that these overrides still follow the configuration hierachy
and inherit any overrides from the settings.

`pghistory.track` also takes the following attributes:

* ``base_model``: For overriding the base model of the event model.
* ``meta``: For supplying additional attributes to the ``Meta`` of the generated
  model.
* ``attrs``: For supplying additional attributes to the event model class.

.. tip::

    We recommend :ref:`creating a custom event model <custom_event_models>` if needing to use these
    attributes.

Ignoring Object and Context References
--------------------------------------

If you'd like to remove the ``pgh_obj`` and ``pgh_context`` fields, set them
to ``None``. This will ignore object and context tracking, along with removing
the fields from the models entirely. This can be done globally with settings
or on a per-event-model basis with the arguments to `pghistory.track`.

.. _custom_event_models:

Custom Event Models
-------------------

Instead of decorating models with `pghistory.track`, users can also use
`pghistory.create_event_model` to create the event model. This interface
has the following advantages:

1. You can declare event models directly in ``models.py``.
2. Fields and ``Meta`` classes can be defined that directly override
   the auto-generated fields. Custom field overrides do *not* follow
   the configuration hierarchy.

For example, let's revisit our ``TrackedModel`` from a previous section:

.. code-block:: python

    class TrackedModel(models.Model):
        int_field = models.IntegerField()
        char_field = models.CharField(max_length=16, db_index=True)
        user = models.ForeignKey("auth.User", on_delete=models.CASCADE)

Now let's track snapshots for every insert and update of ``TrackedModel``
with `pghistory.create_event_model`:

.. code-block:: python

    import pghistory

    class TrackedModel(models.Model):
        ...

    BaseTrackedModelSnapshot = pghistory.create_event_model(
        TrackedModel,
        pghistory.Snapshot()
    )

    class TrackedModelSnapshot(BaseTrackedModelSnapshot):
        class Meta:
            indexes = [
                models.Index(fields=["int_field"])
            ]

The arguments for `pghistory.create_event_model` closely match `pghistory.track`.
By default, event models are abstract unless ``abstract=False`` is provided.
If you want to create a non-abstract model, be sure to pass the
``model_name`` argument like so:

.. code-block:: python

    import pghistory

    class TrackedModel(models.Model):
        ...

    TrackedModelSnapshot = pghistory.create_event_model(
        TrackedModel,
        pghistory.Snapshot(),
        model_name="TrackedModelSnapshot"
    )

Overridden event models can directly override ``pgh_*`` fields or the tracked fields
of the model. We recommend overriding fields with the arguments to `pghistory.create_event_model`
when possible.

.. _denormalizing_context:

Denormalizing Context
---------------------

By default, event models have a foreign key to a central context table. As a result,
this table is frequently updated and inserted during event tracking.

If performance is a concern or you want to partition event tables, context can be denormalized
with `pghistory.ContextJSONField`. You can do this globally with
``settings.PGHISTORY_CONTEXT_FIELD = pghistory.ContextJSONField()`` or
on a per-event-model basis with the ``context_field`` argument to `pghistory.track`
and `pghistory.create_event_model`.

When used, a ``JSONField`` is created directly on the event model for the ``pgh_context`` field.
The ``pgh_context_id`` field defaults to a ``UUIDField`` so that events can be grouped
together.

Behavior of the ``pgh_context_id`` field can be overridden in a similar way as other
fields by using `pghistory.ContextUUIDField` and globally setting ``settings.PGHISTORY_CONTEXT_ID_FIELD``
or supplying the ``context_id_field`` argument to relevant functions.

.. note::

    ``context_id_field`` can be ``None`` if you don't want to track the UUID of the
    context or have a ``pgh_context_id`` field on your denormalized event models.

When using denormalized context, keep in mind that context tracking behavior is going to produce different
results if your application overrides context keys. Take the following example:

.. code-block:: python

    with pghistory.context(key="val1"):
        # Do updates here that produce the first set of events

        with pghistory.context(key="val2"):
            # Do updates here that produce the second set of events

When using denormalized context, the first set of events will have ``key: "val1"`` in their context. The second
set of events will have ``key: "val2"``. When using a shared context table, all events will have ``key: "val2"``.

.. _event_proxy:

Querying Context as Structured Fields
-------------------------------------

Context data is free-form JSON, but ``django-pghistory`` provides a `pghistory.ProxyField` utility that you can
use to proxy JSON fields on event models.

For example, let's create a snapshot tracker of a model and then proxy the ``user`` key from
the context in an event model:

.. code-block:: python

    @pghistory.track(pghistory.Snapshot())
    class MyModel(models.model):
        ...

    class MyModelSnapshotProxy(MyModel.pgh_event_model):
        user = pghistory.ProxyField(
            "pgh_context__metadata__user",
            models.ForeignKey(
                settings.AUTH_USER_MODEL,
                on_delete=models.DO_NOTHING,
                help_text="The user associated with the event.",
            ),
        )

        class Meta:
            proxy = True

.. tip::

    You can use the ``pgh_event_model`` attribute of the tracked model as a quick way
    to inherit the generated event model like above.

Above we've proxied the ``pgh_context__metadata__user`` attribute through a ``ForeignKey`` field. This allows us
to now treat the ``user`` attribute in our context as a foreign key:

.. code-block::

    MyEventProxy.objects.values("user__email")

`pghistory.ProxyField` is just taking a relationship and proxying it to a field. If, for example, you
use denormalized context, the relationship would be ``pgh_context__user``.

.. tip::

    Any relationship can be proxied with this utility, not just JSON fields.

Debugging
---------

There are a few ways in which event model attributes can be changed, whether through global settings, `pghistory.track`
or `pghistory.create_event_model` overrides, or through directly overriding the fields on a base model.

In order to debug how configuration affects your event models, we recommend running ``makemigrations`` after a change
and closely inspecting the output to see what happened.
